VALID8 INTERVIEW ANSWERS

1. Short introduction

My assigned system is a university event attendance management system called Valid8.
It runs using Docker.
The system has a React frontend, a FastAPI backend, and a PostgreSQL database.
It is used to manage users, events, attendance, departments, and programs.


2. How to run the system in Docker

These are the commands I will say and run during the interview:

cd C:\Users\frien\Documents\VALID8_DOCKER_FINAL
docker compose up --build -d
docker compose exec backend python seed.py

After that, I can open:

Frontend:
http://localhost:5173

Backend:
http://localhost:8000

pgAdmin:
http://localhost:5050

If there is a known backend users error, I can run:

docker compose exec backend python cleanup_orphaned_roles.py
docker compose restart backend


3. What the system does

This system is for managing university events and attendance.
It supports different users with different roles.

Admin:
- manage users
- manage departments and programs
- view reports

Student:
- view profile
- view attendance records
- view upcoming events

SSG:
- help manage attendance
- record manual attendance
- monitor attendance records

Event Organizer:
- create events
- manage events


4. How the system works

When a user logs in, the frontend sends the email and password to the backend API.
The backend checks the database.
If the login is correct, the backend returns an access token.
The frontend stores the token and uses it for protected pages.
After login, the system redirects the user based on the user role.

Example:
- admin goes to admin dashboard
- student goes to student dashboard
- ssg goes to ssg dashboard
- event organizer goes to event organizer dashboard


5. Main parts of the system

Frontend:
The frontend is made with React and Vite.
It shows the pages, dashboards, forms, and reports.

Backend:
The backend is made with FastAPI.
It handles login, user management, event management, and attendance logic.

Database:
The database is PostgreSQL.
It stores users, roles, events, attendance records, departments, and programs.
In Docker, the database runs as its own container.
The backend connects to it using the database URL.

Docker:
Docker Compose runs all services together on one laptop.
This makes setup easier and more consistent.


6. Main data in the system

The important data in the system are:

- users
- roles
- student profiles
- ssg profiles
- events
- departments
- programs
- attendance records

A user can have one or more roles.
An event can be connected to departments, programs, and SSG members.
Attendance records connect students to events.

Database details I can explain:

- database name: fastapi_db
- database user: postgres
- database password: postgres
- database port: 5432
- database container/service: db
- backend connection string:
  postgresql://postgres:postgres@db:5432/fastapi_db

Important database tables:

- users = stores account information
- roles = stores role names like admin, student, ssg, and event-organizer
- user_roles = connects users and roles
- student_profiles = stores student details like student ID, department, program, and year level
- ssg_profiles = stores SSG position details
- events = stores event name, time, location, and status
- departments = stores department names
- programs = stores program names
- attendances = stores time in, time out, status, and event attendance records

How the database is used:

When a user logs in, the backend checks the users table and related roles.
When an admin creates or edits a user, the backend updates user-related tables.
When an event organizer creates an event, the backend saves it in the events table.
When attendance is recorded, the backend saves the record in the attendances table.

Why the database is important:

The database is the main storage of the system.
Without the database, login, events, user management, and attendance tracking will not work.


7. My role and contribution

My role was mainly backend-related.
I focused on understanding and checking the FastAPI backend, database connection, API behavior, and backend debugging.
I studied how the frontend sends requests to the backend and how the backend processes data and saves it in PostgreSQL.
I also checked important backend features like login, user management, event management, and attendance flow.

One issue I studied was the users page bug.
The backend returned a 500 error because some user-role records in the database were invalid.
The fix was to clean broken role records and make the backend safer when returning user data.

Simple version:

My contribution was backend-focused. I studied the API flow, database behavior, and backend bugs, especially in user management.

Backend tasks I can say in the interview:

- I studied the FastAPI routes and how they handle requests
- I checked how the backend connects to PostgreSQL
- I reviewed backend logic for users, events, and attendance
- I tested backend endpoints and checked logs when errors happened
- I analyzed a backend bug in the users API and understood the fix

If asked directly about my role:

My role in the project is backend-related. I focused on the API, the database connection, and backend testing and debugging. I worked on understanding how the backend handles login, user management, events, and attendance records.


8. Bug I can explain in the interview

One real bug happened in the users API.
Some user_roles rows had missing role data.
Because of that, the backend crashed when it tried to return all users.
That caused a 500 Internal Server Error.

The fix was:
- clean orphaned or broken user role rows in the database
- add defensive filtering in the backend so invalid role entries do not crash the API


9. Testing I can explain

I can say that I tested:

- if the system starts correctly in Docker
- if the frontend can open in the browser
- if the backend API responds correctly
- if login works
- if users page works
- if event features can call the backend
- if attendance features can connect to the database
- if logs show backend errors when something fails

I also checked API responses and logs to understand if the problem was in the browser, backend, or database.

Because my role is backend-related, I can also say:

- I tested backend routes
- I checked backend error logs
- I checked if database records match the API behavior
- I verified if the backend returns correct responses like 200, 401, 403, or 500
- I checked if invalid database data can break the backend


10. Planned enhancements

I found some realistic improvements for the system:

1. Some frontend pages still use old or mock API paths.
   These should be updated so all pages use the real FastAPI backend.

2. Some automated tests are outdated.
   The test files should be updated to match the current API routes and current models.

3. The face recognition feature is not fully aligned between frontend and backend.
   That part should be completed and tested end-to-end.

4. Security can be improved.
   The secret key and other sensitive values should be moved to environment variables.

5. Data validation and error handling can still be improved so the system does not crash on bad records.


11. Short answer for "What is this system?"

This is a Dockerized university event attendance management system.
It helps manage users, events, attendance, departments, and programs.
It uses React for the frontend, FastAPI for the backend, PostgreSQL for the database, and Docker Compose for running everything together.


12. Short answer for "Why use Docker?"

Docker makes it easier to run the frontend, backend, and database together in one environment.
It helps avoid setup problems between different laptops.


13. Short answer for "What backend and database are used?"

Backend:
FastAPI

Database:
PostgreSQL


14. Short answer for "How is access controlled?"

Access is controlled by login tokens and user roles.
After login, the system checks the user's roles and only allows pages or actions that match those roles.


15. Best 1-minute answer

My assigned system is a university event attendance management system called Valid8.
It runs in Docker using a React frontend, a FastAPI backend, and a PostgreSQL database.
The system supports different roles such as admin, student, SSG, and event organizer.
Its main functions are login, role-based dashboards, event management, and attendance tracking.
My role is backend-related, so my contribution focused on understanding the FastAPI backend, checking API behavior, testing database-related backend flow, and analyzing a real bug in the users API.
I also identified improvements like removing old mock API calls, updating outdated tests, improving the face-recognition flow, and strengthening security and validation.


16. If the teacher asks me to demonstrate the system

I will do these steps:

1. Open terminal in the project folder
2. Run:
   docker compose up --build -d
3. Run:
   docker compose exec backend python seed.py
4. Open:
   http://localhost:5173
5. Explain that the backend is on:
   http://localhost:8000
6. Log in and show the dashboard
7. Explain that different roles see different pages


17. Final simple summary

This project is a role-based university event attendance system.
It works with Docker.
The frontend talks to the FastAPI backend.
The backend talks to PostgreSQL.
The main features are login, user management, event management, attendance tracking, and reports.
My role is backend-related, focused on API understanding, database connection, backend testing, and debugging.
